http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303592404577359820037480302.html?mod=WSJEUROPE_hpp_MIDDLESecondNews
Kabul, U.S. Agree on Support Deal for Next Few Years

KABUL–The U.S. and Afghanistan completed negotiations Sunday on a long-term strategic-partnership deal outlining America's commitments after most foreign forces leave in 2014, officials from both countries said.

After months of sometimes-strained negotiations, Afghan and U.S. officials signed off on a framework agreement, paving the way for U.S. President Barack Obama and Afghan President Hamid Karzai to seal the deal before next month's North Atlantic Treaty Organization summit in Chicago.

The partnership agreement ensures that the U.S. will continue to support Afghanistan even after it ends major combat operations and scales back its development projects over the next two years.

"The document finalized today provides a strong foundation for the security of Afghanistan, the region and the world, and is a document for the development of the region," said Rangin Dafdar Spanta, Mr. Karzai's national-security adviser, who led negotiations for the Afghan government.

The strategic-partnership deal will commit the U.S. to more than a decade of economic and financial support for the Afghan state, which is still battling a resilient Taliban-led insurgency.

While the agreement still requires review from policy makers in both countries, neither side expects any significant roadblocks that could derail the deal, officials say.

Over the past few weeks, Afghan and U.S. negotiators hammered out separate deals on the two biggest sticking points in the talks: controversial U.S.-led night raids and American oversight of Afghan prisoners.

The U.S. has agreed to cede control of detentions and detainees to the Afghan government, and to subject the night raids to Afghan approval.

Mr. Karzai had hoped to secure a concrete financial commitment in the deal, but that would have required explicit approval from the U.S. Congress and potentially delayed or derailed the package.

Instead, Mr. Karzai will have to negotiate with the U.S. and other international supporters over how much financial support they will provide to the Afghan security forces, which are dependent on foreign aid.

The deal is intended, in part, to send a message to the Taliban-led insurgency that the U.S. and its international partners won't abandon Afghanistan when the U.S. and its allies end major combat operations as soon as next year.

"Our goal is an enduring partnership with Afghanistan that strengthens Afghan sovereignty, stability and prosperity and that contributes to our shared goal of defeating al Qaeda and its extremist affiliates," said Gavin Sundwall, a spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. "We believe this agreement supports that goal."

While the agreement sketches out American development and economic support, it doesn't detail the long-term military presence in Afghanistan. That will have to be worked out in separate negotiations that could prove to be even more difficult.

Following similar talks last year, the U.S. withdrew all its forces from Iraq after failing to secure assurances from the Iraqi government that American forces would be given legal immunity from Iraqi courts.