http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303459004577361451277633774.html?mod=WSJEurope_hpp_LEFTTopStories
Dutch Government Close to Collapse

THE HAGUE, Netherlands—The Dutch government was close to collapse on Monday, with the prime minister widely expected to resign after top-level talks on an austerity package failed.

The Dutch cabinet gathered to discuss what to do after Geert Wilders and his Freedom Party, the government's main ally in parliament, walked out of the talks designed to meet European Union budget deficit rules.

Without the Freedom Party, Prime Minister Mark Rutte's right wing coalition no longer commands a majority in parliament. Mr. Rutte is widely expected to offer his resignation when the meeting ends this afternoon, clearing the way for national elections later this year.

He was scheduled to pay his regular weekly visit to Queen Beatrix in the early afternoon and the government information service said he would update her on the political crisis. The remaining question hanging over the cabinet is how—as a caretaker government—it can best comply with European rules and shrink its deficit.

"Our main concern is how we can keep the state finances on the rails on the way to elections," said Economics Affairs Minister Maxime Verhagen via his Twitter feed.

Although the Netherlands has relatively low levels of national debt, its economy is in recession and it is expected to post a deficit of 4.6% in 2012—well over the 3% mandated by European rules.

Opposition lawmakers say they are prepared to work with Mr. Rutte to draw up a 2013 budget—but only if he quits first. The package Mr. Rutte had been negotiating with Mr. Wilders would have slashed foreign aid and hastened a phased increase in the retirement age to 66 years old from 65.

Mr. Wilders said he ultimately could not support the package due to provisions for state pension cuts. "We don't want our pensioners to suffer for the sake of the dictators in Brussels," he said.

European Commissioner Neelie Kroes said in an interview with national broadcaster NOS that Mr. Wilders was being hypocritical, since the Netherlands itself, along with Germany, had been one of the loudest in demanding Brussels adopt 3% deficit limit.

"Pointing to Brussels now is dumb, it's untrue, it's distracting, and it doesn't solve anything," said Ms. Kroes, who is a member of Mr. Rutte's free-market VVD party. She added that she still expects the Netherlands, like other countries, to turn in a preliminary 2013 budget plan by April 30.

If Mr. Rutte is able to work with left-leaning opposition parties, they will likely seek to refocus attention in part on tax increases on the wealthy rather than just spending cuts, notably by reducing a tax deduction on mortgage debt.

Mr. Rutte and his conservative VVD party have previously said the deduction isn't negotiable, but economists say it is a major contributor to Dutch citizens having some of the highest personal debt levels in Europe.

Financial markets have so far taken the Dutch crisis in their stride, with yields on Dutch bonds just 0.11% higher than they were before the weekend. Netherlands government bonds are trading around 2.35% for 10-year debt, about 0.6 of a percent more than Germany.

However, ratings agency Fitch last week warned the Netherlands stands to lose its triple-A credit rating depending on the outcome of the budget talks that failed Saturday.

The Netherlands' Central Bank President Klaas Knot has said Dutch interest rates will likely rise by around 1% if the country's rating is cut, making budget reform vital.