 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/19/business/global/expansion-of-price-cuts-hits-chinas-new-homes.html?ref=business

Expansion of Price Cuts Hits China’s New Homes

BEIJING — The average price of a new home in China fell last month from a year earlier for the first year-over-year decline in two years, data released Wednesday showed, raising investors’ hopes that policies aimed at calming the property market might soon be relaxed.

New-home prices fell 0.7 percent, according to a Reuters calculation using data published by the National Bureau of Statistics. Prices fell in 37 of the 70 cities the bureau monitors, widening from 27 in February.

“The falling home price is gradually increasing the room for further policy relaxation, not only regarding the property sector,” said Shi Qi, an analyst in Shanghai for CEBM, a Chinese financial advisory firm. “The real estate market remains the biggest drag on economic recovery.”

The decline of 0.3 percent from February means the average new-home price has fallen for six consecutive months.

Prime Minister Wen Jiabao said last month that home prices, which have soared tenfold in the last decade, remained “far from returning to reasonable levels.”

Analysts polled by Reuters this year predicted that the average home price would fall between 10 percent and 20 percent in 2012, a pace modest enough to prevent a hard landing of the economy.

Data released last week showed that annual growth in gross domestic product had slowed to 8.1 percent in the first quarter of this year from 8.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011, putting China on track to experience its slowest full year of growth in a decade.

The G.D.P. data underscored the view of investors that the government’s pro-growth fine-tuning of policies would be enough to avoid a hard economic landing, although a rebound in growth might be shallow and unlikely to begin until the second half of the year.

The global outlook report released Tuesday by the International Monetary Fund forecasts full-year growth for China of 8.2 percent, unchanged from its last report. The fund’s sister organization, the World Bank, cut its view on growth last week to the same level, from 8.4 percent previously, and said the rebound might not start before the third quarter.

How and when to loosen regulations on property is a particular problem for Beijing. Acting too early might lead to an immediate rebound in speculative activity and stoke broad inflation. Moving too late would risk an abrupt slowdown of the economy and a supply-induced upward price squeeze in one or two years.

Real estate investment, which accounted for 13 percent of the economy and affects 40 other industries, grew 19.6 percent in March from a year earlier, down from a rise of 27.8 percent in the first two months of the year.