http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303592404577359940905402660.html?mod=WSJEUROPE_hpp_MIDDLETopNews
Hungary Plans to Press EU on Aid

BRUSSELS—Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban starts a two-day visit here Monday, hoping to unblock talks over an aid package from the European Union and International Monetary Fund held up by a series of fierce disputes between Budapest and Brussels.

Mr. Orban hopes to nudge the European Commission, the EU's executive body, into resuming talks over a new assistance program expected to be worth between €15 billion and €20 billion ($26.45 billion).

But the visit could be hard going. Tensions, never far from the surface since Mr. Orban took power in April 2010, have soared in the last few months. The EU has frozen nearly half a billion euro worth of funds earmarked for Hungary and started several legal actions that could see Hungary taken to court over some key government policies.

Investors are skeptical that Mr. Orban's trip will succeed in unblocking the aid talks. "We're as far away as ever from discussing a backstop," said Nomura analyst Peter Attard Montalto.

Mr. Orban is ostensibly here to attend a meeting of the center-right European People's Party and make a speech at the European Policy Centre, a Brussels think tank. But on Tuesday, he will meet with commission President José Manuel Barroso and sit down with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy.

With its currency plummeting to a record low against the euro and Hungarian government bond yields rising above 11% at the turn of the year, Budapest sought talks on a precautionary loan to help shore up investor confidence.

But discussions haven't started because of EU and IMF concerns about Hungary's policies, including a central-bank law passed in December that limits the bank governor's salary and changes the makeup of the interest-rate- setting board, among other things. The EU and IMF have said the law could undermine the bank's independence.

Talks have also been complicated by two other probes of Hungary's policies from the commission, which is concerned about laws that could infringe judicial independence and privacy rights.

Meanwhile, EU member states voted last month to freeze €496 million in fund transfers for Hungary for 2013—out of a total €1.7 billion—after the Commission's projections showed that Hungary won't be able to keep its budget deficit below 3%, as required by the EU.

Frustrations boiled over amid these decisions with Mr. Orban making a speech on Hungary's national day in March that seemed to draw a parallel between Brussels' oversight of its policies and Soviet domination of Hungary during the Cold War.

The EU hit back the next day. Mr. Barroso's spokesperson read a statement from the Commission president which said those who compare the EU to the Soviet Union show a complete "misunderstanding of democracy."

Brussels officials say they expect Tuesday's meeting between Messrs. Barroso and Orban to be quite brief but constructive, although one person said tempers remain frayed from Mr. Orban's "outrageous" March comments. The person said Mr. Barroso's message will be that Hungary must "play by the rules."

Hungarian officials have painted the EU's recent decisions as the kind of bullying of a less powerful member state that Brussels would never risk with the likes France or Germany. They say Budapest has already made significant compromises and has little more room for budging.

The EU says it will make a decision on the infringement procedures by May at the latest although on Friday, a Commission spokesman said work was proceeding "swiftly." A discussion among the 27 EU commissioners could come as early as Wednesday.